# OpenXC Vehicle Interface Firmware Changelog

## v7.1.0

* Feature: Add support for new CrossChasm C5 Cellular platform.
    Includes new http-parser submodule.
    Requires new v0.5+ of openxc-message-format
* BREAKING: Update platform variable names from CROSSCHASM_C5 to
    CROSSCHASM_C5_BT or CROSSCHASM_C5_CELLULAR (fab c5bt or c5cell)
* Improvement: Improved automatic release process.

## v7.0.1

* Fix: Delay at startup to allow timers to stabilize, to avoid shutting down too
    soon when using OBD2_IGNITION_CHECK power mode with DEBUG=0;

## v7.0.0

* BREAKING: Update to latest OpenXC message format, including updated binary
    spec.
* BREAKING: Deprecate USB control commands for version and device ID - use
    generic control command type instead, with the same payload format as if
    sent via UART/BT.
* BREAKING: Refactor tire and door handlers for use as signal decoders.
* BREAKING: Changed `DEFAULT_UART_LOGGING_STATUS` build config to
  `DEFAULT_LOGGING_OUTPUT` to be able to use UART, USB, or both for logging.
* Feature: Support setting explicit CAN frame format when writing messages
    (#230).
* Feature: Support control command to enable/disable passthrough of CAN messages
    on each CAN controller.
* Feature: Support control command to dynamically change the status of the CAN
    acceptance filter (#301).
* Feature: Support control command to dynamically change the payload format
    (#302). Note that binary commands sent to the VI are not yet supported,
    there are still bugs.
* Feature: Support new `action` field of diagnostic requests from OpenXC message
    format.
* Feature: Add a loopback property to CAN buses to support self-testing.
* Improvement: Return a command response with a status for all diagnostic
    request commands.
* Improvement: Update required GNU for ARM version to -4_8-2014q2-20140609
    (#261).
* Improvement: Update required MPIDE version to 20140821 with associated updates
    to Arduino-Makefile
* Improvement: Update to latest version of chipKIT peripheral libraries.
* Improvement: Update required nanopb version to v0.3.1 (#269).
* Improvement: Compile test with LLVM's Clang, which provides much better
    warnings. Fix a lot of minor but important things that it found.
* Improvement: Use new self-receive capabilities in VI for a functional test
    suite that runs on actual hardware. See `fab functionaltest`.
* Fix: Don't let defined CAN messages interfere with normal operation when the
    CAN AF is disabled (#260).
* Fix: Pass a valid Pipeline object to signal handler (#263).
* Fix: Fix double de-reference that caused the VI to crash when receiving
    commands while using the binary payload format.
* Fix: Match diagnostic request command name to the OpenXC message format.
* Fix: Improve build process to make sure stray signals definitions are not
    unintentionally included (#249).
* Fix: Work around lack of symlinks in Windows when setting up development
    environment (#259).
* Fix: Calculate correct payload size when receiving data via USB endpoint 0 on
    PIC32.
* Fix: Respect configuration of raw write permissions for I/O interfaces (#274).
* Fix: Use blocking UART writes on LPC17xx to work around a race condition
    (#306)

## v6.0.3

* Fixed a regression with the ignoreDecoder, where signals were never marked as
  'received' (#254).

## v6.0.2

* BREAKING CHANGE: The PLATFORM environment variable must now be explicitly set
  when running any of the `make` goals.
* BREAKING CHANGE: Move all platform-specific CAN code from generated
  signals.cpp to vi-firmware internals (requires an update to openxc-python).
* Include a config for Vagrant to build a VI firmware development environment.
* Deprecate support for compiling in Cygwin - now recommending Vagrant as it
  will be much more manageable to support.
* Explicitly set all Makefile options when building binary releases.
* Add compile shortcuts with Fabric and recommend that for most simple builds.

## v6.0.1

* Fixed a regression in CAN AF configuration on PIC32 platforms
  ([#237](https://github.com/openxc/vi-firmware/issues/237))
* Updated all shared handlers to use new V6.0 API, fixing the example
  configurations in the process.
* Fix a regression where signal handlers were not being called if frequency was
  not unlimited.

## v6.0

* BREAKING CHANGE: Significantly refactored the `canread` and `canwrite` APIs to
  making custom handlers much easier to implement.
* BREAKING CHANGE: Refactor time.h and FrequencyClock API for clarity and
  usefulness.
* BREAKING CHANGE: Use uint8_t[] for CAN message payloads everywhere instead of
  uint64_t to remove confusion about byte order.
* BREAKING CHANGE: Using CanMessage struct in favor if loose id + data.
* BREAKING CHANGE: Removed "reset" control command.
* BREAKING CHANGE: Add "Pipeline" argument to custom signal read handler
  function prototype, to allow triggering arbitrary new output messages without
  decoding a signal by hand.
* BREAKING CHANGE: Changed USB endpoint numbers to allow for optimal performance
  and a new logging channel.
* BREAKING CHANGE: JSON delimiter for output data changed to '\0' from '\r\n' to
  match the required delimiter for input data. This requires updates to client
  libraries.
* BREAKING CHANGE: Changed the default platform when compiling from CHIPKIT to
  FORDBOARD.
* BREAKING CHANGE: Standardized most Makefile flags to get ready for dynamic
  configuration. Check your environment variables against the new compilation
  docs!
* Merge "canemulator" build into the mainline branch, controlled with the
  DEFAULT_EMULATED_DATA_STATUS compile-time flag.
* Added support for request/response style diagnostic messages, and a special
  build to automatically query for and set up recurring requests for supported
  OBD-II PIDs.
* Fix handling of 32-bit bitfields.
* Add support for extended CAN IDs (29-bit).
* Support configuration of CAN messages acceptance filters on the fly, rather
  than only at startup. This changed an API, but an internal one, so it is not a
  breaking change.
* Add new control command to retrive a unique device ID (only works if Bluetooth
  module is installed right now).
* Support control commands via UART in additional to USB.
* Moved debug logging to a secondary USB endpoint by default - re-enable UART
  with UART_LOGGING flag.
* Update MPIDE dependency to 2013-08* version. Re-run script/bootstrap.sh to get
  the latest version.
* Refactored bootstrap scripts to target specific build environments, so not
  everyone needs every dependency.
* Use new version of Arduino-Makefile which depends on Python and the PySerial
  module.
* Switch RN-42 Bluetooth modules into pairing mode if they supported so client
  devices don't need to poll for a connection.
* Add a power management mode that tries to infer if vehicle is running based on
  OBD-II engine RPM and vehicle speed.
* Remove need for external wire indicatin if UART is to be enabled on PIC32
  after discovering a non-blocking USB status check API call .

## v5.1.3

* On VIs with an RN-42, disable configuration via Bluetooth to make the
  connection more stable on Samsung Android devices.

## v5.1.2

* Add BINARY_OUTPUT flag
* Add compile-time flags to control if raw CAN writes are allowed from various
  interfaces
* Refactored documentation.

## v5.1.1

* Fix hex flashing script in Ubuntu
* Add a Windows .bat file for flashing a with avrdude

## v5.1

* Add BENCHTEST flag to permit sending CAN ACKs when in small CAN network.
* Add an optional binary output format (experimental)

## v5.0

* Rename project from "CAN Translator Firmware" to "Vehicle Interface Firmware"
* BREAKING CHANGE: Remove the sendFrequency flag for a CanSignal and replace it
  with a FrequencyClock attribute that controls the maximum number of times per
  second a signal will be sent.
* BREAKING CHANGE: Add frequency control to CAN messages to allow rate limiting.
* BREAKING CHANGE: Decrease memory footprint by change some data types to const,
  splitting up CanMessage into 2 variants and optimizing all queue sizes.
* An optional forceSendChanged attributed is added to CanSignal - if this is
  true, a changed value will be sent regardless of the maximum frequency.
* Add CAN and output interface statistics logging (behind the `__LOG_STATS__`
  compile-time flag.
* Fix receiving data over USB from some devices, e.g. Android.
* Fix processing CAN messages with many CAN signals (15+) by flushing the
  pipeline mid-translation.
* Add emhashmap as a dependency (script/bootstrap.sh will take care of it)
* Add frequency control for CAN messages that aren't pre-defined in the
  signals.h implementation

## v4.1

* Automatically configure name and baud rate of an attached RN-4x Bluetooth
  module (this adds a few seconds of delay on bootup if nothing is attached)
* Cygwin: fix some building and flashing issues with the latest version of
  Cygwin and all associated packages.

## v4.0.1

* Rename FleetCarma to CrossChasm C5 (to reflect true product name)
* Fix build and issues with PIC32 USB interface, including C5

## v4.0

* BREAKING CHANGE: Add initialize() function to signals.h, must be
  implemented by vehicle platforms. generate_signals.py supports calling
  multiple initialization functions inside this method.
* BREAKING CHANGE (for hardware): chipKIT uses same baud as LPC17xx for UART,
  RN-42 modules will need to be updated.
* BREAKING CHANGE: Moved .h files into subdirectories to minimize the number of
  files at the top level.
* BREAKING CHANGE: Moved almost all functions and data structures inside C++
  namespaces - all code is now compiled with g++.
* BREAKING CHANGE: Renamed many functions to avoid duplicating new namespace
  name in function
* BREAKING CHANGE: Remove UART compile-time flag in favor of setting UART status
  via an external pin. This allows you to dynamically control sending over UART
  when a Bluetooth module actually is attached and has a connected host.
* BREAKING CHANGE: Major refactor of the JSON "mapping" code generation system.
* PIC32-based VI will now go into low power mode if no CAN activity is detected
  for 30 seconds, and will wake up when CAN activity resumes. There is a ~5
  second timeout in the chipKIT bootloader that will cause the first 5 seconds
  of CAN traffic after a wakeup to be missed.
* Added support for FleetCarma data logger (a PIC32 device).

## v3.2.1

* Increase reliability of UART on LPC17xx.
* Decrease data rate of emulator to more closely match a real vehicle (this
  fixes issues with Bluetooth dropouts when using the emulator firmware).
* Ensure consistent CAN message ordering when using the code generation tools.

## v3.2

* Support building to run under a USB bootloader on the LPC17xx.
* Bug fix: custom value handlers are now called every time a signal is received,
  regardless of the value of `send_same` and `send_frequency`.

## v3.1

* Minor improvements to bootstrap scripts for greater compatibility.
* Add LED indicator module and some feedback when I/O interfaces are active.
  * (PIC32) Flash user LED on chipKIT when CAN is active.
  * (LPC17xx) Control 2 RGB LEDs based on CAN activity and I/O interface
    activity.
* Add microcontroller power control to enable sleeping when CAN is active.
  * (LPC17xx) Put the micro into low power mode when CAN is quiet, wake with CAN
    activity. Turn off Bluetooth module on Ford prototype board, 12v power
    passthrough and all other peripherals.
* Monitor VBUS of micro-USB port to improve performance when USB is disconnected
  * (PIC32) If micro-USB VBUS is patched into analog input 0 on the chipKIT,
    read true USB status from that pin.
  * (LPC17xx) Read VBUS status from LPC17xx VBUS input.
* Pull C queue implementation out to an independent library,
  [emqueue](https://github.com/openxc/emqueue).

## v3.0

* BREAKING CHANGE: Combine `odometer` and `fine_odometer_since` restart into a
  single high-precision signal, `odometer`. There is no more
  fine_odometer_since_restart signal.
* BREAKING CHANGE: `decodeCanMessage` in signals.h now is pass the `CanBus` the
  message was received on; signals.cpp files will need to be updated.
* PIC32: UART output at high baud rates (i.e. above 115200).
* PIC32: Detect if USB is actually attached to avoid wasting time - speeds up
  UART dramatically if micro-USB 5v line connected to Analog Input 0 instead of
  5v port on chipKIT Network Shield.
* Slow down emulator to better match a real vehicle's throughput.
* For mappings with "ignore" flag, code generator for signals.cpp will set
  signals handlers to `ignoreHandler` instead of skipping entirely.
* CAN messages with identical IDs can now exist on both CAN1 and CAN2.

## v2.1.3

* Remove custom protocol for "binary" transfers - use "passthrough" JSON style.
* Fix a NULL pointer dereference in the button handler that caused hard crashes
  when CAN2 was connected.
* Calculate correct value for rolling fuel consumed value, it incremented too
  fast previously in some vehicles.

## v2.1.2

* Use bootstrap script when flashing binary firmware.
* Refactor some custom message handlers
* Avoid using cJSON in API for test suite

## v2.1.1

* Add bootstrap script to help new developers set up the build environment.
* Add support for building from source in Windows (with Cygwin)
* Support scripts in root directory are not moved to `script` subdirectory
* JSON mapping format now expects message ID in hex (e.g. "0x80") instead of
  decimal.

## v2.1

* Add Ethernet support on the chipKIT (thanks Ewgenij!)

## v2.0

* Further refactoring to support an additional platform, the ARM Cortex M3
  (specifically the LPC1768/69), with the same code base.
* Fix CAN bus freeze up issue and remove workaround.
* Re-organize build process to improve performance when compiling.
* Remove reader.py testing script, which was extracted into the openxc-python
  library.

## v1.3

* Major refactoring of library internals for better portability.
* Support sending OpenXC messages over UART in addition to USB.
* Add experimental CAN message writing support.

## v1.2

* Add a unit test suite, compiled and run on the development computer.
* Many, many bug fixes.
* Workaround a CAN bus freeze up on the chipKIT by detecting the freeze and
  restarting the CAN connection.

## v1.1

* Add custom handler infrastructure for messages and signals
* Refactor CAN internals

## v0.9
* Pre-release version for testing, supports chipKIT
