Open XC Vehicle Interface Windows Driver
===============================================

In order to be able to work with the Vehicle Interface from your Windows
workstation, you must first install the USB Drivers for the Vehicle Interface.

To start, download the vi-firmware repository. You can use either use git to
clone the repository (using "git clone https://github.com/openxc/vi-firmware")
or use the following URL to download a zipped archive of the repo:
https://github.com/openxc/vi-firmware/archive/master.zip

plug the VI into your computer via USB. Windows will attempt to, and fail to
find a suitable driver.

Windows XP
-----------

1. Click Start, then right-click "My Computer" and click "Manage"
2. On the left side of the screen, click "Device Manager"
3. Locate a device with a yellow question mark next to its icon. Assuming you have no other USB devices with no assigned drivers,
this will be your OpenXC module. Right-click this device and click "Update Driver"
4. Select "No, not this time" for using Windows Update, and click Next.
5. Select "Install from a list or specific location (Advanced). Click Next.
6. Select "Don't search. I will choose the driver to install." Click Next.
7. Click the "Have Disk..." button, then click "Browse..."
8. Locate the OpenXC_CAN_Translator.inf file under vi-firmware/conf/windows-driver/ and select it.
9. Click "OK" on the Install From Disk dialog box, and "OK" to any additional confirmations.
10. If Windows gives you a warning regarding Driver Certification, click "Continue Anyway".
11. After the driver is installed, restart your computer.

Windows Vista/7
---------------

1. Click the Windows "start" button, then search for "Device Manager" and open it
2. Locate a device with a yellow question mark next to its icon. Assuming you have no other USB devices with no assigned drivers,
this will be your OpenXC module. Right-click this device and click "Update Driver Software..."
3. Click "Browse my computer for driver software"
4. Click "Let me pick from a list of devices drivers on my computer"
5. Click the "Have Disk..." button, then click "Browse..."
6. Locate the OpenXC_CAN_Translator.inf file under vi-firmware/conf/windows-driver/ and select it.
7. Click "OK" on the Install From Disk dialog box, then click Next on the Update Driver Software screen.
8. If Windows gives you a warning regarding Driver Certification, click "Continue Anyway".
9. After the driver is installed, restart your computer.

You can test that the driver is properly installed by using the OpenXC Python
library. Follow the instructions on the python OpenXC site to install the
library, then run the "openxc-version" command. It should report back which car
firmware you have flashed onto the VI (Or report no firmware installed if you
haven't flashed a firmware yet).

If you're still getting errors about USB not being found/installed, restart your
computer, and if the issue persists, come ask for help in the Google Group.

License
=======

This driver was created with the libusb-win32 filter driver creator.

The library (DLL and import lib, examples, installers) is distributed under the
terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License (LGPL).

The driver portion (libusb0.sys) is distributed under the terms of the GNU
General Public License (GPL).

The source code for libusb-win32 is available from
http://sourceforge.net/apps/trac/libusb-win32/wiki.
